Proposal
========

Name
----

Daan van Berkel

Company
-------

Luminis

Email
-----

daan.vanberkel@luminis.eu

Bio
---

Daan van Berkel is a enthusiastic software craftsman with a knack for presenting technical details in a clear and concise manner. 

Driven by the desire for understanding complex matters Daan is always on the lookout for innovative uses of software.

Previous Experiences
--------------------

JFall 2011, Software Craftsmanship 2012

Title
-----

Datomic: an exposition of a time-aware NoSQL database

Description
-----------

Rich Hickey's, of Clojure fame, latest brainchild is Datomic, a time-aware NoSQL database. Datomic acknowledges that state and identity for objects are two separate things and takes this premise to its logical extreme.

Datomic stores facts as immutable entries allowing a developer to obtain a pristine snapshot of the entire history of an application. By separating reads from writes Datomic remains highly responsive even on severe loads. Datomic has data distribution build into itself and provides a transparent means of switching between running locally and running in the cloud.

In this session we take a closer look at Datomic. We compare Datomic to both relational databases and NoSQL databases. The architecture of Datomic and its benefits will be discussed and code sample detailing the fine-points will be provided.

Level
-----

Intermediate

Session Type
------------

Technical

Track
-----

New & cool

Language
--------

English

Prerequisite Knowledge
----------------------

Java, SQL, NoSQL

Project Outline
---------------

The session will start by giving an overview of the historic development of databases and the constraints that determined its course up to and including the recent upsurge of NoSQL databases.

After the introduction Datomic is introduced and its datamodel is explained and compared to other (NoSQL) databases models.

A hands-on section will demonstrate the finer details of Datomic and its idiosyncrasies.

The session will wrap up with conclusions and a Q&A. 


